.TH lcoc 1 "10/08/98" "INRIA / CMA" "ESTEREL COMPILER"
.SH NAME
lcoc \- Esterel compiler \- Version v5_21
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B lcoc
[options] file ...
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBlcoc\fR is the Esterel v3 compiler to automata.
It produces an \fBoc\fR format output from one or more \fBlc\fR input
files (or \fBic\fR files if no Esterel \fBrun\fP instruction is used).
If there is no input file, the standard input stream is read. The
\fBic\fP files describe Esterel \fImodules\fP to be processed, and the
\fBoc\fP output file describes the computed automata.
Typical use is: 
.IP
.B lcoc < game1.ic > game1.oc
.PP
or 
.IP
.B lcoc game1.ic > game1.oc
.SH OPTIONS
The following options are interpreted by \fIlcoc\fP.
.IP \fB-v\fR 10
Verbose option: print the name of each compiled module on the standard error
stream.
.IP \fB-s\fP 10
Silent mode: performs binding but does not generate the
\fBoc\fP code.
.IP \fB-w\fP 10
Suppress all warning messages.
.IP \fB-W\fP 10
Display all warning messages (the default is to display only harmful warnings).
.IP \fB-stat\fR 10
Print statistics on the standard error stream: 
parsing and compiling time and process size.
.IP \fB-size\fR 10
Print automata size statistics on the standard error stream: 
number of states, number of actions, and number of action calls.
.IP \fB-show\fR 10
Display dynamically on the standard error stream the number of states 
generated and analysed so far.
.IP "\fB-oldcausality\fP"
Enable the v3_1r4 causality error detection. For example,
the following program: "emit S; present S else emit S end" is
no longer accepted by the compiler unless this option is used.
.IP \fB-version\fP 10
Print the version name on the standard error output stream
and terminate ignoring all other arguments.
.IP \fB-access\fP 10
Print access rights to the processor on the standard error output
stream and terminate, ignoring all other arguments.
.IP \fB-info\fP 10
Print various informations about the processor compilation on the
standard error output stream and terminate, ignoring all other arguments.
.SH BUGS
There can be no more than 32 nested trap instructions. Otherwise, the
compiler complains and stops.
.SH SEE ALSO
esterel(1), iclc(1), occ(1), ocdebug(1)
.br
\fIEsterel documentations\fR
.SH IDENTIFICATION
Ecole des Mines de Paris (CMA) and INRIA.
.br
Written by Frederic Boussinot. Updated by Jean-Pierre
Paris, Xavier Fornari.
