.TH iclc 1 "10/08/98" "INRIA / CMA" "ESTEREL COMPILER"
.SH NAME
iclc \- Esterel binder \- Version v5_21
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B iclc
[options] files ...
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBiclc\fR is the Esterel binder that performs \fBic\fP 
submodule instantiation.
It is normally called by the \fBesterel\fR command. It 
can also be called directly by the user if necessary.

\fBiclc\fR reads  one or more \fBic\fP format input files and
produces a single \fBic\fP format output file. This version
normally treats \fBic\fP format version 7 only. If called with
the \fB-V3\fP option it reads \fBic\fP formats version 5 or 6 only.
Other combinations will give a syntax error.

If there is no input file, the standard input stream is read. 
.PP
The
\fBic\fP format input describes Esterel modules to be processed,
and .lc suffixes are usually given to files containing fully expanded 
Esterel modules with no remaining \fBrun\fP instruction.
Typical use is: 
.IP
.B iclc < game1.ic > game.lc
.PP
or 
.IP
.B iclc game1.ic game2.ic > game.lc
.SH OPTIONS
The following options are interpreted by \fIiclc\fP:
.IP "\fB-main\fP \fIname\fP"
\fIname\fP must be the name of an Esterel module.
If at least one \fB-main\fP option is present, \fIiclc\fP will only bind
the module(s) that are specified by that option, and will ignore
all modules that are not children of those ones. Otherwise, \fBiclc\fP
binds all modules that are not themselves included in other modules.
The \fB-main\fP option is very
useful when using libraries of modules, to avoid expansion and
inclusion in the object \fBlc\fP file of unused
library modules.
.IP \fB-v\fP 10
Verbose mode. Print the different steps of the linking
process on the standard error stream : parsing, analysis, and 
binding of each module.
.IP \fB-V3\fP 10
V3 mode. Accepts version 5 or 6, and rejects version 7 of the 
\fBic\fP format.
.IP \fB-s\fP 10
Silent mode: perform binding but do not output code (useful for
detecting errors).
.IP \fB-w\fP 10
Suppress all warning messages.
.IP \fB-W\fP 10
Display all warning messages (the default is to display only harmful warnings).
.IP \fB-stat\fP 10
Print statistics on the standard error stream: parsing time,
binding time, and process size.
.IP \fB-R[tcfpsk]\fP 10
Trace captures and renamings of objects. The \fB-R\fP option alone
traces all objects, whereas each of the characters \fBt,c,f,p,s,k\fP
selects one type of object: type, constant, function, procedure,
signal and task. For example \fB-Rtc\fP traces types and constants.
.IP \fB-version\fP 10
Print the version name on the standard error output stream
and terminate, ignoring all other arguments.
.IP \fB-access\fP 10
Print access rights to the processor on the standard error output
stream and terminate, ignoring all other arguments.
.IP \fB-info\fP 10
Print various informations about the processor on the
standard error output stream and terminate, ignoring all other arguments.
.IP "\fB\-d\fP[<level>]" 10
Debug mode. Developer usage only.
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
Errors and warnings produced by \fIiclc\fP compiler are intended to be
self-explanatory. The trace option \fB-R\fP
produces the following trace messages:
.PP
Root module FOO:
.IP
the binder begins to treat the root module FOO.
.PP
Submodule /FOO/BAR:
.IP
the binder begins to treat the submodule BAR, called
within module FOO.
.PP
<object> <name> added as %<index> +++
.IP
the <object> named <name> is added to the list of final
<object>s with number <index> . The string "+++"
helps to find later the name of the <object>
numbered <index>. Just look upward for <index> followed by "+++".
.PP
<object> <name> captured by %<index>
.IP
the <object> named <name> is implicitly captured by the final <object>
numbered <index>.
.PP
<object> <name> renamed by %<index>
.IP
the <object> named <name> is explicitly renamed to the final
object numbered <index>. In case of a constant, the %<index> field
may be replaced by an expression (if the constant is replaced by
a litteral expression instead of another constant).
.LP
.SH BUGS
There is no error message if the same signal or constant
appears more than once in a renaming list. Only the first renaming
is applied, however.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
Esterel documentations.
.br
esterel(1), strlic(1), lcoc(1), lcsc(1)
.SH IDENTIFICATION
Ecole des Mines de Paris (CMA) and INRIA, Sophia-Antipolis
.br
Written by Jean-Marc Tanzi

