.TH lcsc 1 "24/3/99" "INRIA / CMA" "ESTEREL COMPILER"
.SH NAME
lcsc \- Esterel boolean circuit generator \- Version v5_21
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B lcsc
[options] file ...
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBlcsc\fR is the Esterel boolean equation generator. It translates 
statements in \fBlc\fP code into boolean equations in \fBsc\fP format.
It is normally called via the \fBesterel\fR command. It 
can also be called directly by the user if necessary.
.PP
Error messages and warnings are written to the standard error stream.
Typical use is: 
.IP
.B lcsc < game1.lc > game.sc
.PP
or 
.IP
.B lcsc game1.lc game2.lc -B game

.SH OPTIONS
The following options are interpreted by \fBlcsc\fP:
.IP \fB-s\fP 10
Silent mode: perform parsing and
type-checking but do not generate the \fBsc\fP code.
.IP \fB-stat\fP 10
Print statistics on the standard error stream: 
parsing, type-checking and coding times as well as process size.
.IP \fB-version\fP 10
Print the version name on the standard error output stream
and terminate ignoring all other arguments.
.IP \fB-access\fP 10
Print access rights to the processor on the standard error output
stream and terminate, ignoring all other arguments.
.IP \fB-info\fP 10
Print various informations about the processor compilation on the
standard error output stream and terminate, ignoring all other arguments.
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
Error messages should be self-explanatory.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
Esterel documentations.
.sp 0
esterel(1), iclc(1), scssc(1)
.SH IDENTIFICATION
.sp 0
Ecole des Mines de Paris (CMA) and INRIA Sophia-Antipolis.
.sp 0
Written by Gerard Berry.

